What is envy?
Do you know?
It’s important that we be able to identify
the symptoms of envy.
Why?
Because envy is an expression
of hatred.
It’s an enemy of peace.
And if left unchecked,
it can result in spiritual death.
As described in the Bible,
envy has two symptoms.
The first is probably more familiar.
An envious person wants
what someone else has.
It’s the second symptom
that makes envy especially dangerous.
An envious person not only wants
what someone else has,
but he also doesn’t want
the other person to have it.
Here’s an example:
In the first century,
Jewish religious leaders envied Jesus
because Jesus was much appreciated
by the common people.
Jesus dealt with people,
including lowly ones,
in a way that dignified them.
As a result, he was appreciated.
The religious leaders envied him.
But rather than adjusting their own way
of dealing with people,
they attacked Jesus verbally
in an effort to destroy
his good reputation.
They spread malicious slander.
Not only did they want
what Jesus had,
but also they didn’t want
Jesus to have it.
No wonder envy is listed
as one of “the works of the flesh”
at Galatians 5:21.
It’s a dangerous quality
that we need to avoid.
How does envy disrupt peace?
Envy undermines, damages,
or even destroys relationships
in the family and in the congregation.
Consider the example of Jacob
and his 12 sons.
Jacob had special affection
for one of his sons, Joseph.
As a result,
Joseph’s brothers became envious.
How did the envy manifest itself?
What was the fruitage?
Well, they dealt treacherously
with Joseph, selling him into slavery.
And as if that weren’t bad enough,
they compounded their wrong
by lying to Jacob,
telling him that Joseph was dead.
According to the Bible account,
Jacob “refused to be comforted.”
He mourned Joseph for years.
What a terrible consequence of envy!
It’s clear that envy
allows no room for love,
compassion, or kindness.
Those qualities go out the window.
And they’re replaced by qualities
such as hatred, strife, fits of anger.
Can envy disrupt the peace
of a congregation?
Consider the examples
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
They envied Moses and Aaron
in the congregation of Israel.
How did that envy manifest itself?
Well, they began
to speak negatively—critically—
of Jehovah’s representatives,
even accusing Moses
of playing the prince
and lifting himself up above the others.
They forgot that Jehovah
had put Moses and Aaron
in their positions of responsibility.
How did Jehovah react
to that manifestation of envy?
He destroyed those three men
and all who supported them.
For a time, the congregation
was robbed of its peace,
and the accounts
certainly provide some insight
into Jehovah’s view of envy.
Now, by this point,
you’re no doubt thinking,
‘I would never want something
so badly that I would
damage someone else to get it.’
But we’re all imperfect.
We have a treacherous heart,
and envy is insidious.
In the following dramatization,
notice how envy
threatens to disrupt peace.
Really?
Bad news?
She’s a sweetie.
It reminds me that I want to speak to her
about a necklace.
You too?
You don’t think she’s showing off?
No.
Everyone thinks she’s “Miss Wonderful”;
she’s starting to agree.
Is this just about Haley?
It seems it’s all about Haley.
Your tea is getting cold.
And you’re changing the subject.
No,
but you’ve brought this up before.
What is it?
You’re friends; you pioneer together.
Yeah, and that’s why I’m concerned.
Concern is good,
but
is there just a little bit of envy in there?
What did you notice?
Well, Emily is suffering
from an onset of envy.
Did you notice
how she questioned Haley’s motives
and potentially called
Haley’s reputation into question?
It could happen to any one of us.
So how do we battle and conquer envy?
By cultivating two beautiful qualities,
humility and contentment.
Let’s see what the Bible
has to say about humility.
Turn with me, please,
to Philippians chapter 2,
and we’re going to begin reading
in verse 3
—Philippians 2:3:
“Do nothing out of contentiousness
or out of egotism.”
What is egotism?
Well, it’s having
an exaggerated opinion of oneself.
Do you think that the religious leaders
in Jesus’ day,
Joseph’s brothers,
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram
had this affliction?
Did they have an exaggerated view
of themselves?
Without question!
But it’s an affliction
that could affect any one of us.
What is the solution?
Well, Paul continues:
“But with humility [or, lowliness of mind]
consider others superior to you”
—or consider others
as more important than yourself.
Now, that kind of mindset
allows a person to do what’s stated
in verse 4:
“As you look out not only
“for your own interests,
but also for the interests of others.”
A humble person
looks out for others.
He doesn’t feel that he deserves
more than others.
Contentment—a content person
is satisfied with what he has.
He doesn’t compare
his privilege or his possession
with another person’s privilege
or possession.
He’s content.
Humility, contentment
—with Jehovah’s help we can cultivate
these beautiful qualities—
qualities that leave no room for envy.
And in doing so, we promote peace
—inner peace, peace in our family,
and peace in the congregation.
And you can be sure
that Jehovah appreciates that.
Brother Gajus Glockentin,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“‘Put Away’ Peace Wreckers—Dishonesty.”